Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsor. Reagan, are
you struggling to replicate the
bugs and performance issues that
your customers are reporting? Plug
Regan into your web and
mobile applications right now, and
diagnose problems in minutes rather
than hours. Kiss goodbye. Having
to dig through log files
and relying on frustrated users
to report issues, make your
software developmental life so much
easier. Using Reagan's error, crash,
and performance monitoring tools. Every
software team can create flawless
software experiences for their customers
with Reagan. Try it free
today. And Ray gun.com. That's
our a Y G U
n.com.  Not answered. And
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today I'm
talking Tom Spillman games. There's
one of the leads on
mano game. How are you,
sir? Hey Scott, how are
you doing? I'm pretty thrilled
to be talking to you
because I like playing games
and then discovering after I've
beat it, that it was
written in C sharp.net lean.
It's just, it's kind of
like something that I feel
far away from, which is
games, cause I've never made
one and then something that
I'm very close to, like.net
and open source. And then
I'm like, Oh, I just
played that. And that was
it. That wasn't dot net
and built with mano game.
That's so nice. Yeah. It's
pretty incredible. We're always, really,
it's always really neat for
us to hear about games
that have shipped. It's like,
Oh, that was written in
modern game. Like sometimes we
don't even know what had
happened. Really. They don't have
it yet. You don't have
to phone home and let
you know it's open source.
You know, anybody can do
anything. So it's kind of
a, sometimes we find out
ahead of time. Sometimes we
found out after the fact
and how long has mano
game been around? And what's
the relationship because there was
a thing called a X
and a touch like 10
years ago, right? Yeah, it
was, it was originally called
X and a touch was
written by Jose for us.
And he, he started basically
cause he really liked the
X and API, you know,
the original X and Hey
guys, they wrote really nice
API to do C-sharp games
that, you know, a lot
of people loved at the
time, but it didn't like
it was kinda misunderstood I
think at the time. But
the API was really solid.
It was built off of,
you know, DX 11 and
DX nine concepts. So it
was a really nice API
to use to quickly prototype
games and develop interesting games
from it. And it was
pretty powerful and he liked
it a lot. He was
like, I'd love to have
this on iOS where the
story at the time was
not as good for building
games. So he said, well,
mano is available on iOS.
How can I make an
API that looks like X
and a, but runs on
iOS. And that's how he
started X and a touch.
So he kind of originally
built it from bill rice,
had a tool, a library
called silver Sprite, which was
basically a version of XMA
that ran in, in, in
Silverlight back in the day.
And he took bits of
that and BICS of another
project called mano X and
a at the time, then
he kind of smashed them
together and started working on
it and got a version
that worked on iOS. And
that was the first version
of mano game that was
on iOS back in 2009.
So it's been around for
a while now. Yeah. And
when I look@thegotogithub.com slash motto
game, I'm looking at the
list of supported platforms and
it's not just windows, Linux
and Mac, it's Android, it's
iPad, it's PlayStation four PlayStation,
Vita, Xbox one and two
different formats. And my favorite
console, Nintendo switch as well
as other things. Is it
okay, Hard to add a
platform? Like, is it a
big deal? There are a
lot of abstractions. It depends
on the platform. You know,
the PC ones have always
been easy because they're usually,
you know, it's usually some
form of open GL or
some form of direct X
and we're, we're good to
go kind of thing. Except,
you know, when my Microsoft
throws a wrench in the
works and gives us a
new platform like windows eight
where things were very different,
right? So those are pretty
easy. The phones are usually
pretty straight forward, cause there's
not a lot of new
phones at this point. The
consoles are the ones that
are a little trickier, but
we've kind of developed a
technique over the years to
get them to console that,
you know, through a cross
compiler technology that we built
that actually makes it pretty
easy. Like our first one
was the first console we
got on was PlayStation four
and that took us some
time to get that up
and running. And at the
time we were using a
version of mano on PlayStation
four and then Vieta was
the next one we did,
but mano wasn't available. So
that's where we developed our
cross compiler to get there.
And that took a couple
of years to get that
solid and reliable. But then
after that we brought it
pretty quickly to Xbox one.
And then after that, we
brought it to switch most
recently. And that I think
we, from the day that
we got to switch dev
kit to the day that
we had at first have
some, a game running on
there, it was maybe like
a month and a half
or so. And then ever
since then, you know, Newports
are pretty quick. We've gotten
pretty good at getting it
to new console platforms, mostly
cause our cross compiler technology
Cross compiler technology. When I
think about.net, I think about,
you know, a, a jitter
adjust in time compiler, I
think about a runtime. And
then I always wonder how
would this runtime live or
exist on a small system?
And I understand that with
Xamarin and on iPhones and
stuff, you know, you're doing
basically ahead of time, AOT
not jet, right, is the
same thing, the case on
a PlayStation Yes. In a
way. And the PlayStation for
the current PlayStation four games,
most of them are running,
using mano AOT on, on
the newer platforms. We've moved
over to our cross compiler
where we actually take C-sharp
code. We compile it as
a C sharp assembly. Then
we run it through our
cross compiler works, takes that
C sharp code or a
C sharp L and dumps
out a bunch of C
plus plus code. And then
compile that yeah. Basically actually
like text. Yep. You then
we compile that along with
a custom backend runtime built
from the mano BCL and
our own runtime implementation kind
of focused on game stuff.
So kind of a myths,
all the security layer stuff
that would be in normal
Mo mano runtimes and you
know, our own version of
a garbage collector and a
compile that altogether. And we
have a native assembly that
can basically run on it
on a console and that's
been pretty successful for us.
We mostly went that direction
because at the time it's
amazing how much C-sharp the
ecosystem has changed in the
last five years, we first
started doing that five years
ago, mano was still a
GPL product and it was
still owned by Xamarin. And
if you wanted to use
it on a closed platform,
you had to pay a
licensing fee. And that was
kind of, it was kind
of a problem. A lot
of times when we were
trying to get to new
platforms, it was like, you
know, it became a thing
between Xamarin and the licensing
in the console manufacturer to
figure out a licensing deal.
And that became, you know,
difficult. So one day, you
know, out of the blue,
we were kind of just
like, you know, I, I
think it, what it reminded
me of is that the
year that we did this,
there was a demo of
unreal engine running in a,
in a browser using JavaScript,
you know, that was using
that ASM JS technology. And
it was really impressive. And
I saw that demo and
I was like, you know,
if they can convert cross
compile C, C plus plus
to JavaScript and make it
run fast, I can surely
cross compile C sharp L
down to C plus plus
and make it run fast.
So that's when we started
that project. And, you know,
it took us quite a
few years to get it
to that point. But at
this point, you know, we
have a pretty solid technology
that we can deploy.net applications
or.net games in particular onto
consoles pretty quickly and pretty
reliably, you know, but it
took quite a while to
get there. And it's, it's
that flexibility that's allowed us
to get into more consoles
at this point. Now there
is Microsoft started their own
cross compiler tech. I think
it's called core RT. It's
currently open source and we've
looked at that a couple
of times, but you know,
our is says a few
features that I think were
better for us at the
moment, but this is not
something new, like a unity
does this as well. They
have their, a ILT CPP
technology that they built on
their end. That's how unity
runs on most of the
consoles nowadays. So it's kind
of come into fashion, I
guess, using a cross compiler
to bring a.net to other
platforms, but I'm hoping one
day, you know, dot net
makes all of that all
obsolete, you know, with making
a really core version of.net,
that's fully open source and
it's easy, easily portable to
new platforms, Right? Exactly. Something
that you could go and
call configure and make on.
And it would just work.
Exactly. And it Always been
very different. I mean, mottos
tried to do that. It's
just a mano is a
very complex beast and it's
hard to kind of do
that kind of thing with
it. And you have to
have a lot of knowledge
about the inner workings of
mano and how it builds
in order to make that
successful. And at the time
there was also a licensing
issue. Well, the licensing issue
like went away a couple
of years ago, right? So
at this point, it's really
only a matter of understanding
the build system properly, but
we've kind of stepped with
our cross compiler cause we
kind of get some things
for free and that we
get, we instead of break
point anywhere in the code
and it works, I can
set a break point in
the garbage collector in no,
when the garbage collector is
running and why, or what
allocations having students, some nice
features of doing that. But
it also gave us a
really good idea of like
how much.net brings to you,
like the amount of code
that you have to generate
to implement. Even the most
basic C-sharp features is kind
of incredible how much code
is behind the hood to
make that work. And it's,
it's focused our mind on
like w how much better
C-sharp is for development. Anything
else, you know, the C
plus plus here is just
a means to an end.
You know, the C sharp
part is the part that
we want to keep, and
we're hoping there's, dotnet moves
forward that, you know, we're
able to do more of
that stuff using, you know,
the common.net that everybody else
is using and not our
custom AOT process. Okay. So
speaking of bringing things to
the table and hiding things,
you're, you know, you're cross
compiling or transpiling from one
language into another, and then
there's a, there's a runtime
and there's always the sea
runtime and things like that.
Right. What do you do
in the abstraction leaks? You
said you can set a
break point. How is that
possible that you can set
a break point in C
sharp? Do you map from
the what's happening in C
plus plus to what's what
your intentions were in C-sharp
Oh, no. Yeah. I know
I'm misunderstanding. We don't set
a break point in C
sharp. We could, we have
some code in there that
like emits line pragmatists. So
you can actually do that
and see the actual C
sharp code and do it
that way. But we really
often don't do it. We
usually usually work directly from
the C C plus plus
if we have to do
that, but it's really kind
of a throw away. The
idea is it's really treated
as an AOT process. You
run the cross compiler, it
dumps out C plus plus
code updating source files is
it needs to, you know,
so that it makes your
build times minimal. And then
when you build, it just
builds the files that change
runs on the device, and
you can set break points
in the C plus plus
code, or at the low
level runtime code, if you
need to, in order to
debug things as needed. But
yeah, it isn't as nice
as just working in plain
C-sharp, that's where we want
to get to eventually, but
that's going to probably require
some more work on a,
on the official C-sharp on
getting it to be more
portable, EAs, more easily portable
to new platforms, which is
still kind of tricky. I
see. So you want a,
if you want to think
about C plus plus as
a minified, C-sharp in this
sense, the way that we
see source maps and like,
I can do TypeScript, or
I can do even wisdom
or blazer, he would have
12 in the browser and
then hit a break point
and it's kind of a
Right, right. Yeah, exactly. And
I think, you know, the
web blazer is another example
of that kind of thing,
like dot nets, really going
everywhere at this point. And,
you know, I know that
we were experimenting with more
web based C-sharp and it's
very exciting for us to
see mano game running on,
on browsers now with technologies
like that. Okay. So this
is a game framework, but
how much does it, how
much does mano game give
me if I'm going to
make a game, like, like
I'm looking at a game
here called chasm. That's like
a Tootie, you know, little
dude runs around back and
forth on a pixels pixel
screen. How much of this
is a game maker and
how much of this is
just, you know, get a
framework to help me Blit
things onto the screen. I'm
trying to understand what it
gives me and then what
it doesn't give me. Right.
Yeah. I mean, I think
that's a clear distinction that
we can make there. You
know, something like unity, that's
more of a game maker
in that it's more of
an IDE and more of
a tool that somebody can
even more pull things together,
DRO, drag, and drop it,
use preexisting components and kind
of build something more visually,
I guess, in a way,
whereas a mano game is
more of a programmer's toolkit
than anything else. It is
more low level is not
really for an artist, even
though we've had people that
I've talked to like a,
a popular game, Salton sanctuary
that was really popular there
on, on PS4 and lots
of platforms you're recently, you
know, that developer didn't really
consider himself a programmer. When
he started the project, he
kind of just looked at
XMA samples and pulled together
code and kind of learned
as he went along, you
know, but, but he was
able to build this really
popular game out of it.
Well, we're really a programmers
kind of level tools. So
a lot of people come
into it expecting something more
unity. Like it's like, it's
not really that it is
really, if you want to
really know your code from
bottom up, this gives you
that ability. If you want
to write your own entity
systems and high level game
systems and your own editors,
that's really what this is
about. It is not about,
here's an editor, here's a
pre pre-baked system for, you
know, rendering my game objects.
It's, it's really more about
abstracting, the low level graphics
and sound API APIs and
input API APIs, so that
you can focus on your
game code in your gameplay
and not on, well, how
do I make this render
the same way on an
iPad and the same way
on the console? Okay. So
an example, like if we're
talking about today games, cause
I just ended up finishing
Katana zero yesterday, and I'm
doing a lot of 2d
sprites thinking about sprites or
batches of sprites. I just
want them on the screen,
whether I want them rotated
a certain way or blended
with other sprites, mano game,
Hide all that from me.
Right. I mean, there is
the motto game has again,
coming from XMA, we kind
of adopted the entire X
and API, which was really
great and very friendly. And
it had a concept of
Sprite batch where you would
just say, Hey, I'm going
to bring in a batch
of sprites and you can
say, draw this one here,
draw that one there, draw
this one here, you just
pass it a texture and
a coordinate. And if you
want rotation and things like
that, and then you say
end and it takes care
of under the hood to
sort them batch them and
render them to the screen.
So it's kind of like
a high level of that
level, but you can also
go down and actually work
with Vertex, buffers and index
buffers and shaders and wow.
So you can go lower
level if you want to.
But the Sprite batch has
kind of a nice convenient
way to kind of get
in there and do two
D things. And there's some
more, we have some 3d
support where there's some model
classes and things like that
where you can bring in
a model, import it in
from 30th, max exporting is
like an FBX or a,
a colada file and then
Crow and then build it
in the content pipeline and
actually render it to the
screen. But that's a little
bit more involved. We see
more, typically more 2d games,
people doing more to games
with mano game, but there
are also some 3d games
out there's like right now,
like one of the most
popular or the most popular
flight SIM on iOS is
called infinite flight and that's
all mano game and they've
actually, they took it and
like modified it and made
some changes to make it
fit what their needs are
since it's an open source
project, but it is a
motto game-based project. Yeah. I
actually had Laura Lavonne on
the show in episode number
five 93 in August of
20 2017. Sure. To put
a link to her in
the, in the show notes.
And that's like you said
that you're, you're seeing more
two D games, but infinite
flight really pushes 3d. It's
quite an amazing thing. I
mean, you're looking at it.
It's almost like a PC
quality flight simulator in 3d
on an iPad. It's yeah,
yeah, yeah. It's a it's
they they've done some really
cool stuff with the quality.
There is really high end
that it's amazing that, you
know, whenever we see these
things, it's like, wow, that's
modern game as well. That's
impressive that, you know, but
it's really the time that
they spend engineering their own
systems on top of mano
game, that's, you know, the
real magic here. And we
mostly see today games, cause
in general, today games are
much easier to develop and
understand, you know, from, you
know, building systems and things
like that. It's harder to
get to a three D
game, but we have some
three D games that are
out there, you know? So
it's, we have a little
bit of both. Hey, there's
you know, about the strange
Loop conference, it brings together
over 2000 software developers for
an educational and inspiring experience.
You can see talks like
monitoring traffic and space behind
the scenes of the New York
times, crossword securing cloud applications,
building an open source pancreas,
the science and history of
color voice-driven development, probabilistic programming,
the computers of Voyager and
Grammy nominated recording artist imaging
heap, strange loop 2019 takes
place September 12th through the 14th
in st. Louis, get your
tickets now@thestrangeloop.com and use discount
code Hansel, H a N
S E L for $75
off. You mentioned different shaders
and low-level things, but it's
low level, but still abstracted
away from the, from the
hardware. Is that correct? Yes.
You know, for shader is,
you know, for the most
part, I guess the industry
is kind of adopted HLSL
is kind of like a
basic standard for shaders. So
like in mano game, you
build your shaders and HLSL,
which is a Microsoft shaving
language that was used in
direct decks. And we use
a, another, again, another kind
of cross compiler technology to
convert that HLSL into GLSL
for GL platforms. You know,
it's an open source tool.
I forgot the name of
it off the top of
my head. That's used to
do that conversion. And then
on consoles, they're all kind
of a little different, some
consoles use something very similar
to HLSL. So we use
that civil I'm already have
cross compilers HLSL to the
consoles native shader language. And
you know, for the most
part that's kind of been
adopted across the industry. Like
even even unreal engine, you
kind of write your shaders
and once an HLSL and
under the hood, they cross
compile it to the right
platforms, just because it's easier
to do it that way
than to try to write
a native shader in that
native platforms language, You might
not know that acronym. Of
course it's high level shader
language. And then GLSL is
the open GL shader or
shading language. What is a
shader there's pixel shaders, there's
geometry shaders, all flavors of
shaders. Yes. Yes. Oh, well,
I mean a shader, you
can think of it as
a small program that runs
on the graphics card. You
know, it's people don't realize
that your graphics card is
a separate PC, basically running
separately from your regular PC.
So your regular PC sends
that graphics card, some commands
and it runs its own
programs. So every pixel that
you see on the screen
or really groups of pixels
are run through a pixel
shader that actually does all
the mathematical calculations to build
the final pixel onto the
screen. And that's what you're
building is you're building a
shader that just tells the
GPU how to shade your
pixel to colorize that pixel.
And it can be everything
from something very simple that
just read your pixel from
a texture, that map that
you pass the graphics card,
or it could be something
very complex that does mathematical
calculations and build something very
procedural. So it just depends.
And there's pixel shaders work
on your pixels, your Vertex
shaders work on the Vertex
data on the geometry that
you pass through the hardware.
And those, those are kind
of the basic building blocks
of almost all rendering across
all games and all game
engines When I've seen 2d
pixel games or kind of
this resurgence that we've seen
in the last five or
10 years of, of, you
know, 16 bit games, we'll
call them kind of a
game like chasm or again,
that could like Stardew Valley
that looks like it could
be a super Nintendo game.
They feel like we remember
those games were, but they're
far more sophisticated. Oh, absolutely.
Like the little, the little
pixelated person will walk by
a fire and the fire
itself casts light and changes
the pixels. And that just
wouldn't have been possible with
simple sprites back in the
day. Right? Absolutely. I mean,
that's, it's funny. We spend
a lot of developers now
spend a lot of time
trying to get pixel perfect.
Right. It's hard. It's easy
to be just slap an
image onto the GPU and
get some, you know, some
photo realistic looking image working
to get something pixel perfect,
where it looks like, and
an honest to goodness, 16
bit game for back in
the day or an eight
bit game back in the
day is very difficult to
do properly. So I know
that the chasm guys, when
we work with them, you
know, they were very, they
were very intense about making
sure that everything was pixel
perfect, that the art was
exactly all the pixels were
perfectly square. There wasn't any
cutoff or, you know, any
small little differences in pixels,
which is very easy to
happen when you're trying to
port it to multiple platforms.
So it's a, it's a
really, it's an art and
a challenge to make those
things look like that, even
though it seems like it's
easy, it's actually not, you
know, in the UC games
like chasm like that, you
see a Celeste, which was
like a, it was like
game of the year, last
year that tries to maintain
that pixel perfect look. But
also as a new things,
like they, all their UIs
are kind of done in
a high fidelity kind of
look mostly for portability and
localization, but it had a
very interesting look. So it's
like people are mixing techniques,
you know, pixel perfect along
with, you know, things that
are more modern. And in
order to build kind of,
I guess, retro games that,
that, that are different they're
they feel retro and they
have some retro concepts, but
they, they have a new
look and a new feel,
which I think is, you
know, people, people like, I
think it's a, it's a
nice throwback in difference from,
you know, your typical call
of duty, you know, doom
kind of things. Absolutely. Like
I just finished this game,
Katana zero just literally just
yesterday. And it totally feels
like something I would have
played in the nineties, but
if I go back and
I, for example, I recently
modded my Nintendo 64 to
support HTMI with a custom
chip called an ultra HTMI.
And when you go back
and actually See the way
it was in the early
days, It wasn't like it
was today. These are these
modern pixel games are extremely
sophisticated. Right. I think we've
made our we've improved Things
where our memories have upscaled
the graphics to be much
nicer than they actually were.
Yeah. That's definitely an effect.
I mean, we were, you
know, in, for our regular
business here, you know, we
do game ports and we're
currently working on a, a
port of a game from
20 years ago that ran
on the PlayStation one, PlayStation
two, and, you know, bringing
those to a modern console
and uprising the graphics and
stuff. But it's a, it's
difficult, you know, a lot
of people like it's hard,
like even though we're appraising
the graphics, it's hard. I
think for some people to
realize how much we're upgrading
them, because they're either mind
makes up the differences. Like
it's very hard for somebody
to realize how low fidelity
some of these games were
back then, you know, you
really have to see it
side by side to really
go like, wow, there's a
big, a big improvement here
over what it was. And
yeah, it's kind of amazing
that, you know, how much,
how much games have advanced
in the last 20 years.
Yeah. Three 20 by two
40. It doesn't cut it
anymore. Indeed. Yeah. Not quite,
even though, like, I think
it's, TowerFall renders at three
20 by two 40 internally,
right. Into an offscreen render
target. Yeah. Like there's some
of the classic pixel art
games, Bryn and mano game
render to offscreen targets that
are these low resolutions in
order to get that pixel
look and then they upscale
them and then apply a
bunch of fancier effects on
top of it to kind
of modernize the look on
top of it. So it's,
it's interesting how they, they
do these techniques. That is
very, very interesting. Now, one
of the things that, again,
as a doc, I think
it will be dominant. Developers
have a little bit of
low self esteem. Maybe I
do, because like we said,
we're always amazed when we
find out that like something
like mano game hits the
big time. Is it true?
That Valley is written in
motto game. Yes. I mean,
yeah. The hottest game of
the year, everyone was talking
about starting a Valley and
it's everywhere. Yeah. It's pretty,
it's been pretty huge. You
know, Eric, the developer, he,
he had written it like
he was just a garage
developer working on his own
for several years, bringing sturdy
Valley to market. He kind
of, he kind of learned
programming along the way and
he wrote it in X
and a back then he
just, he liked the programming
language and he worked on
it. And then we came
in and started helping them
a couple of years back.
It was to bring it
to other platforms. So at
the time was like, well,
mano game is a perfect
fit for that, you know,
since he had written in
next to the originally. So
that's where we started our
journey of getting it to
all these other console platforms.
And yeah, it's, it's amazing
how, how big Stardew Valley
is and the amount of
people that play it. It's
huge. It's, you know, on
switch, it's done extremely well.
They just released an iOS
version, which has done extremely
well. I think it's still
like in the top 10
or 20 on the, on
the app store, the Android
version just shipped as well.
It's amazing. That's fantastic. It's
so nice. And what's great
about it is that you
play the game and you
don't know like that's the
way it's supposed to be.
Like, you just enjoy it.
You have a great experience
and hopefully the developer had
a great experience making it
and using mano games. Yeah,
absolutely. I mean, end of
the day, you know, a
game is a game. It
can be written in any
language. Some are harder than
others. Like we've been recently
porting a game that, that
was written in Java originally
and Java, as much as
people think it's portable, isn't
really portable strangely enough. So
that was an interesting experiment
in taking what we ended
up doing with that game
is we, we use some
of the tech that we
used in mano game and
we actually took the Java
code and converted it into
C sharp using like an
off the shelf tool is
available on the internet to
convert Java to C sharp.
And then we ran it
through our cross compiler and
got it onto consoles, which
is crazy that we cross
compiled it twice. But that's
essentially what we did to
bring it to consoles, but
nobody would know. I mean,
from the outside, a player
would never know that it
was written in Java or
there was cross compile twice
or any of this nonsense.
You know, it's, it's really
about the developers, you know,
picking your tools are really
about the developers and your
workflow. And, you know, C
sharp is just a really
nice language to work with.
It's a, you know, you
can get to the nitty
gritty. If you need to,
if you really need performance,
you can say, Hey, I'm
going to start using unsafe
code in this section. Cause
I know what I'm doing.
And you better know what
you're doing. If not, you
can hit cause problems. Like
we reporting a game the
other day and it was
using some unsafe code and
it was crashing. We're trying
to figure out why. And
it's like, because they were
overflowing memory, they were going
outside of the bounds of
memory, which unsafe code in
C sharp will let you
do. It's called say for
a reason, but, but you
being able to turn kind
of features like that on
and off, you know, it
was beneficial. You know, we've,
we've definitely seen in, you
know, in our developing, in
our reporting days that, you
know, C plus plus games
are generally have a tougher
time being stable. And Le
they're generally have, are harder
to get stable and reliable.
You'll find more bugs and
pointer errors and array errors,
things you don't generally run
into in a C-sharp based
game. So there's definitely some
trade offs there. If your
game can, if you're not
trying to make the next
crisis or the next doom,
you, you know, you could
probably get away with C
sharp on just about any
game that you want to
build and just dive into
some more unsafe code practices
in places where you really
need crazy amounts of performance.
But in general, most C
sharp games that we poured
in don't use very much
unsafe code is pretty straightforward.
Cause again, in these games,
the GPU is doing the
bulk of the work, right?
You're passing it, all the
graphics code, all the graphics
commands and the GPS doing
the work to actually crunch
out the graphics. It's mostly
when your game has to
have a lot of CPU
intensive work that, you know,
C sharp can maybe become
a problem, or when you're
going through massive amounts of
memory, right. You know, C
sharp has a garbage collector.
And in that, a lot
of people think, well, garbage
collectors, bad for games. You
know, even though like, you
know, every unity game as
it is as a garbage
collector in it, right. But
if you think of it,
I always thought of it
like this. Like if you
had a C plus plus
based game and you, every
time you needed to allocate
to work with a string,
you'd allocate with when knew
and didn't call delete on
it constantly to be just
making all these new and
delete allocations, you wouldn't do
that. You wouldn't write a
C plus plus game. That
way it's inefficient. It's the
bad idea. Well, you shouldn't
be doing that kind of
thing in C sharp either.
So you know, the same
things you do in a
C plus plus game, like
pull your objects, you know,
use, you know, reuse objects
and pull them is the
common techniques that you'd use
in C sharp. So in
general, it, you know, unless
you're being very sloppy, C
sharp has never been, you
know, you can, you can
make fast games that don't
get lots of GC hiccups,
you know, on a, on
NC sharp. You just have
to be a little smart
about how you write it.
What is it? The relationship
between mano and mano game
in the sense of mano
game runs on most of
the dot nets, right? Yeah.
It's the relationship is loose.
I guess I asked the
Dominican Louis he's, he's one
of the guys that took
over for Jose when he
was stepping away from the
project and he kind of
ran the project for a
lot of years. He was
the one that came up
with the name for named
it, change it from a
touched the mano game. And
I think it just sounded
like, Oh, well, you know,
it kind of follows mottoes
naming convention. So we'll use
mano game. That's what he
called it at the time.
It was just, it really
was just that the it's
never really been anything tied
to mano in any particular
way, other than we use
mano on several platforms. But
yeah, the relationship is loose.
You know, we really kind
of follow the, you know,
try to run on whatever.net
is available. Kind of a,
you know, idea because the
truth is that every platform
has different flavors of.net. You
know, you might have an
old version of.net here or
a newer one there we
experimented once with the, using
the, have you ever heard
of, I think it was
called.net. M F is It
Michael framework? Yeah. It was
a tiny, tiny.net that would
run on things like a
net. Right, right. We've experimented
with trying to run on
things like that. It's, you
know, I think, I guess
that's the nice thing about.net
is that there are different
flavors and you can kind
of tailor it to different
platforms. Now we're hoping for
the grand new reunification, right.
Where all these flavors of.net
come back together into, you
know, back into one thing
and maybe one day that
will occur. But, you know,
till then, you know, we're
kind of maintaining our flexibility
because we know that it's
just going to be different
on each platform. Like we
were looking at, I think
Samsung uses a version of.net
on some of their TV
OSS for building where you
can build games with that.
We've been looking into that
platform and it's a different
version of.net yet again. So
you have to maintain flexibility,
but in general, most all
the flavors have the same
basic concepts, a garbage collector.
You have the same dotnet
class library, which is very
flexible and useful for, you
know, game development. So we
just ended up providing our,
our layer, which gives you
the low level graphics and,
you know, your audio APIs
and your input API APIs,
and you're ready to go.
So we try to maintain
kind of conservative approach, not
using the most cutting edge.net
features unless we actually have
to, in order to make
sure that we can get
to as many platforms as
possible. Are you, are you
trying to pound a define,
you know, like half pound
to find your way around
things, or are you doing
plugins to when something is
specific to an operator? We,
we tend to do a
mixture. We do two things
we do. We do pound
to find every once in
a while, we did that
really early on in the
modern game project. We did
a lot of that. Mostly
because people don't realize this,
but using an interface like
a C-sharp interface actually costs
you cycles like a interface
function calls are slower than
just a regular function call.
And Eric at least can
be, especially in an IOT
sense in a Git sense.
I think the Git can
sometimes do some really clever
things and optimize those things
away at times. So there
are some overheads to doing
interface based calls. So we've
always kind of resisted doing
that just because we didn't
want to add any more
overhead than we absolutely had
to, especially when, when you're
going to mobile and, you
know, every cycle kind of
counts. It was really important
to us not to do
that. So we use a
lot of pound defines early
on, but that became really
difficult to maintain. So the
new technique that we've been
using, which has actually been
really, really flexible for us,
and I don't think we've
seen very many other projects
use it is we've been
using partial classes a lot
to do this. So what
we would do is we
would define a most of
our, most of the stuff
is implemented as a, a
single class that has different
calls that we define as
like platform calls that are
platform specific calls. And those
aren't implemented in the main
class CS file. And then
we actually have a separate
CS file that ha that's
per platform that implements these
other functions that are implemented
through a partial function or
a partial, you know, through
another class, another function in
a partial class. And that
works out really nice cause
it kind of organizes the
code in different platforms. And
it doesn't require a bunch
of if depths which are
easily get tangled up. And
you know, it's hard to
kind of read your code
if you have a ton
of deaths, but at the
same time implies no performance
cost at all. Right. Because
it's all done at compile
time. So we've been really
happy with that technique and
it's worked really well for
us. So yeah, we we've,
we've had pressure in the
past to like make a
bunch of interfaces and stuff
we've kind of held back
just because we just don't
want to introduce any more
overhead to that processes if
possible. And the partial class
stuff has worked really well.
So people can check out
mano game@monogame.net. You shipped there's
thousands of games that have
shipped with a mano game.
It's supported basically everywhere. X-Box
switch PlayStation, four Vita Mac,
Linux, iOS, Android windows. Is
this a place where people
could get involved? If they're
looking to get involved in
open source, can they maybe
help you with your documentation?
Oh, absolutely. You know, we're
always looking for people to
help. It's it's, you know,
if anybody's run open source
project, they know that it's
very difficult to get help
and get good help, you
know, people, a lot of
times people tend to help,
but you know, they just
don't have enough experience to
help properly. So it's always
difficult to find the right,
you know, good, good help,
but anybody that wants to
come in and help jump
in there, we have issues
Mark in our GitHub that
are Mark kind of good
for beginner kind of issues
that, you know, anybody can
jump in there and help
him fix. And it's really
community driven. You know, we
have a small group of
kind of a have guys
that help help maintain it,
you know, from day to
day, you know, checking, pull
requests and things like that.
But you know, it's pretty
much all volunteer work. You
know, people that are jumping
in there to help because
they feel like they really
want to move the project
forward. Cause they have their
own vested interest in seeing
the project succeed. So all
really a volunteer labor of
love from all of us.
Well, I look where I'm
looking right now and I
see 16 open issues all
marked as good first issue.
Great opportunity to get involved
in open source. And if
you're looking to make a
game, do it, check it
out. Mano game.net. Thank you
so much, Tom Spillman for
chatting with me today. Thanks
Scott. It's great. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. We'll see you again
next week. .